# Programming a Guessing Game
- We’ll implement a classic beginner programming problem: a guessing game. Here’s how it works: the program will generate a random integer between 1 and 100. It will then prompt the player to enter a guess. After a guess is entered, the program will indicate whether the guess is too low or too high. If the guess is correct, the game will print a congratulatory message and exit.
## Setting Up a New Project
- If you don't know how to set up a new project read chapter 1.
## Breaking down the Guessing Game
### Processing a Guess
- The first part of the guessing game program will ask for user input, process that input, and check that the input is in the expected form. To start, we’ll allow the player to input a guess. 
```rust
use std::io; // This command bring the io input/output library into scope

fn main() {
    println!("Guess the number!");

    println!("Please input your guess.");

    let mut guess = String::new(); // creating a mutable variable to store the user input.

    io::stdin() 
        .read_line(&mut guess)
        .expect("Failed to read line"); // expect is to handle the potential failure.

    println!("You guessed: {guess}"); // This will print the value in guess
}
```
- By default, Rust has a set of items defined in the standard library that it brings into the scope of every program. This set is called the prelude.
- If a type you want to use isn’t in the prelude, you have to bring that type into scope explicitly with a 'use' statement.
- **In Rust, variables are immutable by default, meaning once we give the variable a value, the value won't change.**
- For example:
```rust
let apples = 5; // immutable
let mut bananas = 5; // mutable
```
- **In Rust references are immutable by default.**
- Printing Values with println! Placeholders:
```rust
let x = 5;
let y = 10;

println!("x = {} and y = {}", x, y);
```
### Generating a Secret Number
-  Rust doesn’t yet include random number functionality in its standard library. However, the Rust team does provide a rand crate with said functionality.
- **Remember that a crate is a collection of Rust source code files.**
- Before we can write code that uses rand, we need to modify the Cargo.toml file to include the rand crate as a dependency.
- Cargo fetches the latest versions of everything that dependency needs from the registry, which is a copy of data from Crates.io. Crates.io is where people in the Rust ecosystem post their open source Rust projects for others to use.
- Updating a Crate to Get a New Version: **cargo update**
### Generating a Random Number
```rust
 let secret_number = rand::thread_rng().gen_range(1..=100);
```
- we call the rand::thread_rng function that gives us the particular random number generator that we’re going to use.
- The gen_range method takes a range expression as an argument and generates a random number in the range. The kind of range expression we’re using here takes the form start..=end and is inclusive on the lower and upper bounds, so we need to specify 1..=100 to request a number between 1 and 100.
### Comparing the Guess to the Secret Number
```rust
use std::cmp::Ordering;
fn main() {
    // --snip--

    println!("You guessed: {guess}");

    match guess.cmp(&secret_number) {
        Ordering::Less => println!("Too small!"),
        Ordering::Greater => println!("Too big!"),
        Ordering::Equal => println!("You win!"),
    }
}
```
- The Ordering type is another enum and has the variants Less, Greater, and Equal. These are the three outcomes that are possible when you compare two values.
- The cmp method compares two values and can be called on anything that can be compared. It takes a reference to whatever you want to compare with: here it’s comparing the guess to the secret_number. Then it returns a variant of the Ordering enum we brought into scope with the use statement. We use a match expression to decide what to do next based on which variant of Ordering was returned from the call to cmp with the values in guess and secret_number
-  A few of Rust’s number types are (i32, a 32-bit number); (u32, an unsigned 32-bit number); (i64, a 64-bit number); as well as others. Unless otherwise specified, Rust defaults to an i32, which is the type of secret_number unless you add type information elsewhere that would cause Rust to infer a different numerical type. The reason for the error is that Rust cannot compare a string and a number type.
```rust
let guess: u32 = guess.trim().parse().expect("Please type a number!");
```
- We create a variable named guess. But wait, doesn’t the program already have a variable named guess? It does, but helpfully Rust allows us to shadow the previous value of guess with a new one. Shadowing lets us reuse the guess.
- We bind this new variable to the expression guess.trim().parse(). The guess in the expression refers to the original guess variable that contained the input as a string. The trim method on a String instance will eliminate any whitespace at the beginning and end.
- The parse method on strings converts a string to another type. Here, we use it to convert from a string to a number. We need to tell Rust the exact number type we want by using let guess: u32. The colon (:) after guess tells Rust we’ll annotate the variable’s type. Rust has a few built-in number types; the u32 seen here is an unsigned, 32-bit integer. It’s a good default choice for a small positive number. 