# Common Programming Concepts
- In this chapter you’ll learn about variables, basic types, functions, comments, and control flow
## Variables and Mutability
- When a variable is immutable, once a value is bound to a name, you can’t change that value. To illustrate this, let’s generate a new project called variables in your projects directory by using cargo new variables.
- Then, in your new variables directory, open src/main.rs and replace its code with the following code. This code won’t compile just yet, we’ll first examine the immutability error.
```rust
fn main() {
    let x = 5;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
    x = 6;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```
- Although variables are immutable by default, you can make them mutable by adding mut in front of the variable name. for example:
```rust
fn main() {
    let mut x = 5;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
    x = 6;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```
- We’re allowed to change the value bound to x from 5 to 6 when mut is used. 
## Constants
- Like immutable variables, constants are values that are bound to a name and are not allowed to change, but there are a few differences between constants and variables.
- First, you aren’t allowed to use mut with constants. Constants aren’t just immutable by default—they’re always immutable. 
- You declare constants using the const keyword instead of the let keyword, and the type of the value must be annotated(Don't worry about annotation we'll discuss about it later).
- Constants can be declared in any scope, including the global scope, which makes them useful for values that many parts of code need to know about.
- The last difference is that constants may be set only to a constant expression, not the result of a value that could only be computed at runtime.
- Rust’s naming convention for constants is to use all uppercase with underscores between words.
- Here's an example of a constant declaration:
```rust
const THREE_HOURS_IN_SECONDS: u32 = 60 * 60 * 3;
```
- Constants are valid for the entire time a program runs, within the scope they were declared in.
## Shadowing
- We can shadow a variable by using the same variable’s name and repeating the use of the let keyword as follows:
```rust
fn main() {
    let x = 5;

    let x = x + 1;

    {
        let x = x * 2;
        println!("The value of x in the inner scope is: {x}");
    }

    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```
- Shadowing is different from marking a variable as mut, because we’ll get a compile-time error if we accidentally try to reassign to this variable without using the let keyword.
- The other difference between mut and shadowing is that because we’re effectively creating a new variable when we use the let keyword again, we can change the type of the value but reuse the same name. For example:
```rust
    let spaces = "   ";
    let spaces = spaces.len();
```
- The first spaces variable is a string type and the second spaces variable is a number type. Shadowing thus spares us from having to come up with different names, such as spaces_str and spaces_num; instead, we can reuse the simpler spaces name. However, if we try to use mut for this, as shown here, we’ll get a compile-time error:
```rust
    let mut spaces = "   ";
    spaces = spaces.len();
```
## Data types
- Every value in Rust is of a certain data type, which tells Rust what kind of data is being specified so it knows how to work with that data. We’ll look at two data type subsets: scalar and compound.
- Keep in mind that Rust is a statically typed language, which means that it must know the types of all variables at compile time.
```rust
let guess: u32 = "42".parse().expect("Not a number!");
```
- If we don’t add the : u32 type annotation above, Rust will display the following error, which means the compiler needs more information from us to know which type we want to use.
### Scalar types
- A scalar type represents a single value. Rust has four primary scalar types: integers, floating-point numbers, Booleans, and characters.
- Integer types: An integer is a number without a fractional component.(Please refer this section for more details). Each variant can be either signed or unsigned and has an explicit size. 
- Floating point types: Rust also has two primitive types for floating-point numbers, which are numbers with decimal points. Rust’s floating-point types are f32 and f64, which are 32 bits and 64 bits in size, respectively. The default type is f64 because on modern CPUs it’s roughly the same speed as f32 but is capable of more precision. All floating-point types are signed. example:
```rust
fn main() {
    let x = 2.0; // f64

    let y: f32 = 3.0; // f32
}
```
- The Boolean Type: As in most other programming languages, a Boolean type in Rust has two possible values: true and false. Booleans are one byte in size. The Boolean type in Rust is specified using bool. For example:
```rust
fn main() {
    let t = true;

    let f: bool = false; // with explicit type annotation
}
```
- The Character Type: Rust’s char type is the language’s most primitive alphabetic type. Here’s some examples of declaring char values. Note that we specify char literals with single quotes, as opposed to string literals, which use double quotes. For example:
```rust
fn main() {
    let c = 'z';
    let z: char = 'ℤ'; // with explicit type annotation
    let heart_eyed_cat = '😻';
}
```
- Rust’s char type is four bytes in size and represents a Unicode Scalar Value, which means it can represent a lot more than just ASCII.
### Compound types
- Compound types can group multiple values into one type. Rust has two primitive compound types: tuples and arrays.
#### The tuple type:
- A tuple is a general way of grouping together a number of values with a variety of types into one compound type. Tuples have a fixed length: once declared, they cannot grow or shrink in size.
- We create a tuple by writing a comma-separated list of values inside parentheses. Each position in the tuple has a type, and the types of the different values in the tuple don’t have to be the same. 
- We’ve added optional type annotations in this example:
```rust
fn main() {
    let tup: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);
}
```
- The variable tup binds to the entire tuple, because a tuple is considered a single compound element.
- To get the individual values out of a tuple, we can use pattern matching to destructure a tuple value, like this:
```
fn main() {
    let tup = (500, 6.4, 1);

    let (x, y, z) = tup;

    println!("The value of y is: {y}");
}
```
- This program first creates a tuple and binds it to the variable tup. It then uses a pattern with let to take tup and turn it into three separate variables, x, y, and z. This is called destructuring, because it breaks the single tuple into three parts. Finally, the program prints the value of y, which is 6.4.
- We can also access a tuple element directly by using a period (.) followed by the index of the value we want to access. For example:
```rust
fn main() {
    let x: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);

    let five_hundred = x.0;

    let six_point_four = x.1;

    let one = x.2;
}
```
- The tuple without any values has a special name, unit.
### The Array Type
- Another way to have a collection of multiple values is with an array. For example:
```rust
fn main() {
    let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
    let months = ["January", "February", "March", "April", "May", "June", "July",
              "August", "September", "October", "November", "December"];
}
```
- You write an array’s type using square brackets with the type of each element, a semicolon, and then the number of elements in the array, like so:
```rust
let a: [i32; 5] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
```
- Here, i32 is the type of each element. After the semicolon, the number 5 indicates the array contains five elements.
- You can also initialize an array to contain the same value for each element by specifying the initial value, followed by a semicolon, and then the length of the array in square brackets, as shown here:
```rust
let a = [3; 5];
```
- The array named a will contain 5 elements that will all be set to the value 3 initially. This is the same as writing let a = [3, 3, 3, 3, 3]; but in a more concise way.
#### Accessing Array Elements
```rust
fn main() {
    let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

    let first = a[0];
    let second = a[1];
}
```
#### Invalid Array Element Access
- Let’s see what happens if you try to access an element of an array that is past the end of the array.
```rust
use std::io;

fn main() {
    let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

    println!("Please enter an array index.");

    let mut index = String::new();

    io::stdin()
        .read_line(&mut index)
        .expect("Failed to read line");

    let index: usize = index
        .trim()
        .parse()
        .expect("Index entered was not a number");

    let element = a[index];

    println!("The value of the element at index {index} is: {element}");
}
```
## Functions
- Functions are prevalent in Rust code. You’ve already seen one of the most important functions in the language: the main function, which is the entry point of many programs.
- You’ve also seen the fn keyword, which allows you to declare new functions.
- Rust code uses snake case as the conventional style for function and variable names, in which all letters are lowercase and underscores separate words.
```rust
fn main() {
    println!("Hello, world!");

    another_function();
}

fn another_function() {
    println!("Another function.");
}
```
### Parameters
- We can define functions to have parameters, which are special variables that are part of a function’s signature.
- When a function has parameters, you can provide it with concrete values for those parameters. Technically, the concrete values are called arguments.
```rust
fn main() {
    another_function(5);
}

fn another_function(x: i32) {
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```
- In function signatures, you must declare the type of each parameter. This is a deliberate decision in Rust’s design: requiring type annotations in function definitions means the compiler almost never needs you to use them elsewhere in the code to figure out what type you mean. The compiler is also able to give more helpful error messages if it knows what types the function expects.
- Let's see another example with multiple parameter.
```rust
 fn main() {
    print_labeled_measurement(5, 'h');
}

fn print_labeled_measurement(value: i32, unit_label: char) {
    println!("The measurement is: {value}{unit_label}");
}
```
### Statements and Expressions
- Function bodies are made up of a series of statements optionally ending in an expression. So far, the functions we’ve covered haven’t included an ending expression, but you have seen an expression as part of a statement. Because Rust is an expression-based language, this is an important distinction to understand. Other languages don’t have the same distinctions, so let’s look at what statements and expressions are and how their differences affect the bodies of functions.
- **Statements are instructions that perform some action and do not return a value. Expressions evaluate to a resulting value.** Let’s look at some examples.
- We’ve actually already used statements and expressions. Creating a variable and assigning a value to it with the let keyword is a statement. In below example y = 6; is a statement.
```rust
fn main() {
    let y = 6;
}
```
- Statements do not return values. Therefore, you can’t assign a let statement to another variable, as the following code tries to do; you’ll get an error:
```rust
fn main() {
    let x = (let y = 6);
}
```
- **The let y = 6 statement does not return a value, so there isn’t anything for x to bind to.** This is different from what happens in other languages, such as C and Ruby, where the assignment returns the value of the assignment. In those languages, you can write x = y = 6 and have both x and y have the value 6; that is not the case in Rust.
- **Expressions evaluate to a value and make up most of the rest of the code that you’ll write in Rust.**
- The 6 in the statement let y = 6; is an expression that evaluates to the value 6. Calling a function is an expression. Calling a macro is an expression. A new scope block created with curly brackets is an expression, for example:
```rust
fn main() {
    let y = {
        let x = 3;
        x + 1
    };

    println!("The value of y is: {y}");
}
```
This expression:
```rust
{
    let x = 3;
    x + 1
}
```
- is a block that, in this case, **evaluates to 4**. That value gets bound to y as part of the let statement. Note that the x + 1 line doesn’t have a semicolon at the end, unlike most of the lines you’ve seen so far. **Expressions do not include ending semicolons.** If you add a semicolon to the end of an expression, you turn it into a statement, and it will then not return a value. Keep this in mind as you explore function return values and expressions next.
### Functions with Return Values
- Functions can return values to the code that calls them. We don’t name return values, but we must declare their type after an arrow (->). **In Rust, the return value of the function is synonymous with the value of the final expression in the block of the body of a function.** **You can return early from a function by using the return keyword and specifying a value**, but most functions return the last expression implicitly. Here’s an example of a function that returns a value:
```rust
fn five() -> i32 {
    5
}

fn main() {
    let x = five();

    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}
```
- There are no function calls, macros, or even let statements in the five function—just the number 5 by itself. That’s a perfectly valid function in Rust. Note that the function’s return type is specified too, as -> i32. Try running this code; the output should look like this: The value of x is: 5.
- Let’s look at another example:
```rust
fn main() {
    let x = plus_one(5);

    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
}

fn plus_one(x: i32) -> i32 {
    x + 1 // puting semecolon here create compiler error since you are converting expression to statements.
}
```
- Running this code will print The value of x is: 6. But if we place a semicolon at the end of the line containing x + 1, changing it from an expression to a statement, we’ll get an error.
## Comments
- All programmers strive to make their code easy to understand, but sometimes extra explanation is warranted. In these cases, programmers leave comments in their source code that the compiler will ignore but people reading the source code may find useful.
- Here’s a simple comment:
```rust
// hello, world
```
## Control Flow
- if Expression : Blocks of code associated with the conditions in if expressions are sometimes called arms, just like the arms in match expressions
```
fn main() {
    let number = 3;

    if number < 5 {
        println!("condition was true");
    } else {
        println!("condition was false");
    }
}
```
- It’s also worth noting that the condition in this code must be a bool. **If the condition isn’t a bool, we’ll get an error.** For example, try running the following code:
```rust
fn main() {
    let number = 3;

    if number {
        println!("number was three");
    }
}
```
- Running the below code will print number was something other than zero.
```rust
fn main() {
    let number = 3;

    if number != 0 {
        println!("number was something other than zero");
    }
}
```
- Handling Multiple Conditions with else if:
```rust
fn main() {
    let number = 6;

    if number % 4 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 4");
    } else if number % 3 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 3");
    } else if number % 2 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 2");
    } else {
        println!("number is not divisible by 4, 3, or 2");
    }
}
```
- Using if in a let Statement: 
```rust
fn main() {
    let condition = true;
    let number = if condition { 5 } else { 6 };

    println!("The value of number is: {number}");
}
```
- The below program will produce compiler error since we are try to assign different types to the same variable.
```rust
fn main() {
    let condition = true;

    let number = if condition { 5 } else { "six" };

    println!("The value of number is: {number}");
}
```
## Repetition with Loops
- Rust has three kinds of loops: loop, while, and for. Let’s try each one.
	- Repeating Code with loop: The loop keyword tells Rust to execute a block of code over and over again forever or until you explicitly tell it to stop(use break keyword or ctrl + c).
	```rust
		fn main() {
		loop {
			println!("again!");
		}
	}
	```
	- Returning Values from Loops
	```rust
	fn main() {
		let mut counter = 0;

		let result = loop {
			counter += 1;

			if counter == 10 {
				break counter * 2;
			}
		};

		println!("The result is {result}");
	}
	```
	- Loop Labels to Disambiguate Between Multiple Loops: If you have loops within loops, break and continue apply to the innermost loop at that point. You can optionally specify a loop label on a loop that we can then use with break or continue to specify that those keywords apply to the labeled loop instead of the innermost loop. Loop labels must begin with a single quote. Here’s an example with two nested loops:
	```rust
	fn main() {
		let mut count = 0;
		'counting_up: loop {
			println!("count = {count}");
			let mut remaining = 10;

			loop {
				println!("remaining = {remaining}");
				if remaining == 9 {
					break;
				}
				if count == 2 {
					break 'counting_up;
				}
				remaining -= 1;
			}

			count += 1;
		}
		println!("End count = {count}");
	}
	```
	- Conditional Loops with while
	```rust
	fn main() {
		let mut number = 3;

		while number != 0 {
			println!("{number}!");

			number -= 1;
		}

		println!("LIFTOFF!!!");
	}
	```
	- Looping Through a Collection with for
	```rust
	fn main() {
		let a = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];
		let mut index = 0;

		while index < 5 {
			println!("the value is: {}", a[index]);

			index += 1;
		}
	}
	```
	- As a more concise alternative, you can use a for loop and execute some code for each item in a collection.
	```rust
	fn main() {
		let a = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];

		for element in a {
			println!("the value is: {element}");
		}
	}
	```
	-Here’s what the countdown would look like using a for loop and another method we’ve not yet talked about, rev, to reverse the range:
	```rust
	fn main() {
		for number in (1..4).rev() {
			println!("{number}!");
		}
		println!("LIFTOFF!!!");
	}
	```
