# Managing Growing Projects with Packages, Crates, and Modules
- The programs we’ve written so far have been in one module in one file. As a project grows, you should organize code by splitting it into multiple modules and then multiple files. A package can contain multiple binary crates and optionally one library crate. As a package grows, you can extract parts into separate crates that become external dependencies. This chapter covers all these techniques.
- Rust has a number of features that allow you to manage your code’s organization, including which details are exposed, which details are private, and what names are in each scope in your programs. These features, sometimes collectively referred to as the module system, include:
	- Packages: A Cargo feature that lets you build, test, and share crates
	- Crates: A tree of modules that produces a library or executable
	- Modules and use: Let you control the organization, scope, and privacy of paths
	- Paths: A way of naming an item, such as a struct, function, or module
## Packages and Crates
- A crate is the smallest amount of code that the Rust compiler considers at a time. Even if you run rustc rather than cargo and pass a single source code file, the compiler considers that file to be a crate. Crates can contain modules, and the modules may be defined in other files that get compiled with the crate, as we’ll see in the coming sections.
- **A crate can come in one of two forms: a binary crate or a library crate.**
- **Binary crates are programs you can compile to an executable that you can run,** such as a command-line program or a server. **Each must have a function called main that defines what happens when the executable runs.** All the crates we’ve created so far have been binary crates.
- **Library crates don’t have a main function, and they don’t compile to an executable. Instead, they define functionality intended to be shared with multiple projects.** 
- Most of the time when Rustaceans say “crate”, they mean library crate, and they use “crate” interchangeably with the general programming concept of a “library".
- A package is a bundle of one or more crates that provides a set of functionality. A package contains a Cargo.toml file that describes how to build those crates. Cargo is actually a package that contains the binary crate for the command-line tool you’ve been using to build your code. The Cargo package also contains a library crate that the binary crate depends on. Other projects can depend on the Cargo library crate to use the same logic the Cargo command-line tool uses.
- A package can contain as many binary crates as you like, but at most only one library crate. A package must contain at least one crate, whether that’s a library or binary crate.
- Let’s walk through what happens when we create a package. First, we enter the command cargo new:
```
$ cargo new my-project
     Created binary (application) `my-project` package
$ ls my-project
Cargo.toml
src
$ ls my-project/src
main.rs
```
