# Getting started
## Intstall
- The following command give you rustc and cargo.
```
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.3 https://sh.rustup.rs -sSf | sh
```
## Updating
```
rustup update
```
## Uninstall
```
rustup self uninstall
```
## Writing and Running a Rust Program
- create a rust file in the following format Filename: main.rs
```
$ rustc main.rs
$ ./main
Hello, world!
```
## Automatic Formatting with rustfmt
- To install rustfmt, enter the following:
```
rustup component add rustfmt
```
- The above command give you rustfmt and cargo-fmt 
- To Automatically format you rust code run the following command:
```
rustfmt main.rs
```
- To format any cargo project, enter the following:
```
cargo fmt
```
- Running this command reformats all the Rust code in the current crate. This should only change the code style, not the code semantics.
## Breaking down your first hello-world program
- **println! calls a Rust macro. If it had called a function instead, it would be entered as println (without the !).**
- Rust is an ahead-of-time compiled language, meaning you can compile a program and give the executable to someone else, and they can run it even without having Rust installed. If you give someone a .rb, .py, or .js file, they need to have a Ruby, Python, or JavaScript implementation installed (respectively). But in those languages, you only need one command to compile and run your program. Everything is a trade-off in language design.

## Breaking down your hello-cargo program
- Cargo is Rust’s build system and package manager. Most Rustaceans use this tool to manage their Rust projects because Cargo handles a lot of tasks for you, such as building your code, downloading the libraries your code depends on, and building those libraries. (We call the libraries that your code needs dependencies.)
- The simplest Rust programs, like the one we’ve written so far, don’t have any dependencies. If we had built the “Hello, world!” project with Cargo, it would only use the part of Cargo that handles building your code. As you write more complex Rust programs, you’ll add dependencies, and if you start a project using Cargo, adding dependencies will be much easier to do.
### Creating a Project with Cargo
	- run the following command to create new cargo project.
	```
	$ cargo new hello_cargo
	$ cd hello_cargo
	```
	-  The first command creates a new directory and project called hello_cargo. We’ve named our project hello_cargo, and Cargo creates its files in a directory of the same name.
	- Go into the hello_cargo directory and list the files. You’ll see that Cargo has generated two files and one directory for us: a Cargo.toml file and a src directory with a main.rs file inside.
	- Cargo has generated a “Hello, world!” program for you. So far, the differences between our project and the project Cargo generated are that Cargo placed the code in the src directory, and we have a Cargo.toml configuration file in the top directory.
### Building and Running a Cargo Project
	- Build your project by entering the following command:
	```
	cargo build
	```
	- Because the default build is a debug build, Cargo puts the binary in a directory named debug.
	-  Running cargo build for the first time also causes Cargo to create a new file at the top level: Cargo.lock. This file keeps track of the exact versions of dependencies in your project. This project doesn’t have dependencies, so the file is a bit sparse. You won’t ever need to change this file manually; Cargo manages its contents for you.
	- You can run the executable with this command:
	```
		./target/debug/hello_cargo
	```
	- but we can also use cargo run to compile the code and then run the resulting executable all in one command:
	```
		cargo run
	```
	- Cargo also provides a command called cargo check. This command quickly checks your code to make sure it compiles but doesn’t produce an executable:
	```
	cargo check
	``` 
	- Building for Release
	```
		cargo build --release
	```
### Recap  on Cargo
- Let’s recap what we’ve learned so far about Cargo:
	- We can create a project using cargo new.
	- We can build a project using cargo build.
	- We can build and run a project in one step using cargo run.
	- We can build a project without producing a binary to check for errors using cargo check.
	- Instead of saving the result of the build in the same directory as our code, Cargo stores it in the target/debug directory.
	- When your project is finally ready for release, you can use cargo build --release to compile it with optimizations. This command will create an executable in target/release instead of target/debug.
## Summary
- You’re already off to a great start on your Rust journey! In this chapter, you’ve learned how to:
	- Install the latest stable version of Rust using rustup
	- Update to a newer Rust version
	- Open locally installed documentation
	- Write and run a “Hello, world!” program using rustc directly
	- Create and run a new project using the conventions of Cargo
- This is a great time to build a more substantial program to get used to reading and writing Rust code. So, in Chapter 2, we’ll build a guessing game program. If you would rather start by learning how common programming concepts work in Rust, see Chapter 3 and then return to Chapter 2.
